---
title: "A fun network issue, and bash piping"
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Linux
---
<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/ncase/nutshell/nutshell.js"></script>
<script>
Nutshell.setOptions({
    startOnLoad: true, // Start Nutshell on load? (default: true)
    lang: 'en', // Language (default: 'en', which is English)
    dontEmbedHeadings: true, // If 'true', removes the "embed this as a nutshell" option on headings
});
</script>
So I had an interesting issue recently.

<!--more-->

When doing a system update, I ran into this error:
```
$ sudo pacman -Syu
...truncated...
( 6/10) Updating 32-bit fontconfig cache...
Fontconfig error: failed reading config file: /etc/fonts/conf.d:  (errno 21)
Fontconfig error: failed reading config file: /usr/share/fontconfig/conf.avail:  (errno 21)
...truncated...
```

So after some Googling, we find that its a result of 
[this issue](https://bugs.archlinux.org/task/70305) -- somehow, the
access times in a bunch of our files have been changed to 2076, 
and we need to `touch` a bunch of files to fix this!

We could do this manually, but why do that, when
we can write a complicated shell command?

Let's start with the basics:
```
$ find -H / | xargs stat -c '%n %x'
```
We're running [:find](#find) with the [:-H flag](#find-h) and
piping the output to [:xargs](#xargs).

`xargs` then runs the command `stat -c '%n %x` on those files.
(`stat -c '%n %x'` itself gives the name and last access time of each
of its arguments.)

So now let's use [:grep](#grep) to
filter out for entries from 2076, and clean up to just filenames
with [:awk](#awk):

```
$ find -H / | xargs stat -c '%n %x 2>&1 | grep 2076 | awk '{ print $1 }'
```

Finally, we have a list of filenames we need to fix the access
time of. We can do this with xargs and [:touch](#touch):

```
$ find -H / 2>&1 | xargs stat -c '%n %x 2>&1 | grep 2076 | awk '{ print $1 } | xargs sudo touch -h'
```

And voilà! We are done!


# :x find
The `find` command lists all files in a certain directory matching 
certain parameters. We're using it to list every single file on our 
system. 
# :x xargs
`xargs` is a great utility! It lets you execute commands on things
in standard input. For example, `ls | xargs cat` will run `cat` on
each of the outputs of `ls`.

# :x find-h
The -H flag tells `find` to ignore symbolic links.

# :x grep
`grep` takes in input and filters it out according to some search pattern
(in this case the string "2076")

# :x awk
`awk` is a language for manipulating text. In this case, 
`{ print $1 }` tells `awk` to simply print the first token
(which is the name of the file.)

# :x touch
`touch` changes the access and modified times of files to the current 
time.
